\begin{abstract}

Nearly a century ago, the foundations of modern statistics laid the groundwork
for a science of causality. Today, causal inference is central to the study of
the most impactful questions at the intersection of science and policy: By what
mechanisms do novel therapeutics mitigate relapse in addiction disorders? How do
immunobiological markers mediate action mechanisms of vaccines? While
randomization provides ``gold standard'' tools for quantifying causal effects,
such trials are costly and limit the scope of scientific inquiry. Thus,
techniques for statistical causal inference with complex, observational data are
critical to today's, and tomorrow's, scientific endeavors.

Observational studies obviate many of the shortcomings of randomized trials but
bring their own challenges and promises. Without randomization, causal inference
is plagued by confounding: vaccinees may be more likely to engage in risky
behaviors and patients assigned a candidate therapeutic are not uniformly
``treated'' due to clinician heterogeneity. Adjusting for potential confounders
is a daunting challenge in an era where studies routinely measure numerous
high-dimensional characteristics. While observational studies empower scientists
to assess mechanistic, path-specific causal effects that \textit{cannot be
learned} with randomized data, tools from non/semi-parametric statistical theory
and machine learning are needed to avoid imposing unrealistic assumptions and
novel causal effect estimands are required to better address mechanistic
questions.

Causal inference methodology is critical to answering real-world scientific
questions, but traditional approaches make too many simplifying assumptions. By
ignoring biased sampling designs, continuous-valued treatments, and confounding
of path-specific effects, standard techniques fall short of empowering
mechanistic discovery. Such techniques often require \textit{a priori} modeling
assumptions unsupported by domain knowledge, limiting their utility for
real-world data analysis.

This dissertation, divided into six chapters, extends theory and methods for
non/semi-parametric causal inference in settings with continuous treatments,
with particular attention paid to issues emerging from biased sampling designs
and path-specific causal effects. Throughout, \textit{stochastic treatment
regimes}, or stochastic interventions, are leveraged to provide a single,
unifying framework for formalizing such causal inference problems.

Chapter~\ref{one} considers estimation of the generalized propensity score,
a quantity critical to estimating the causal effects of stochastic
interventions. We formulate algorithms for flexibly estimating it using the
highly adaptive lasso, a nonparametric regression estimator. We then develop
a novel inverse probability weighted estimator of these types of causal effects
and demonstrate its ability to achieve the non/semi-parametric efficiency bound
in numerical experiments.

Chapter~\ref{two} focuses on the application of the causal effects of stochastic
interventions in real-world studies that rely upon outcome-dependent two-phase
sampling (e.g., case-cohort designs). The work includes a methodological advance
that unites techniques for estimating the causal effects of stochastic
interventions with corrections for biased sampling, allowing for these complex
causal parameters to be efficiently estimated under such designs. Motivated by
the aims of an HIV vaccine efficacy trial, this contribution allows researchers
to probe how vaccination-induced immunogenicity of candidate immune correlates
of protection may best be modulated by future vaccines, and the proposed
methodology is demonstrated through a re-analysis of this trial's data.

The COVID-19 pandemic took the world by storm during the final year of this
work. Chapter~\ref{three} generalizes the methodology proposed in
Chapter~\ref{two} to help maximize what can be learned from the critical
scientific questions posed by vaccine trials to combat COVID-19. These
developments have served as part of the immune correlates analyses of the
COVID-19 Prevention Network, a large-scale collaboration organized by the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

Chapter~\ref{four} examines path-specific causal effects formulated via
stochastic interventions and broadens the scope of the general framework of
causal mediation analysis. In particular, this work introduces a new class of
direct and indirect effect parameters robust to intermediate confounding.
Developing non/semi-parametric efficient techniques for the flexible estimation
of these path-specific effects facilitates their use in quantifying mechanistic
knowledge and extracting actionable insights from modern, large-scale studies.

Chapter~\ref{five} discusses the role of open source software and reproducible
research in statistics and allied computational sciences. Three software
packages for statistical causal inference, each implementing elements of the
statistical methodology discussed prior, are introduced.

Chapter~\ref{six} concludes with a discussion of interesting avenues that may
motivate future research.

\end{abstract}
