\chapter{Discussion}

This thesis has introduced an automated, robust method for analyzing
high-dimensional biological sequencing data with relatively modest sample sizes.
In the provided examples, the challenges presented were two-fold, including both
obtaining simultaneous inference for a large number of comparisons and
adjustment to account for potential confounders of the association of interest,
in the context of a large statistical model and few biological replicates. Since
the goal is estimation within a nonparametric (infinite-dimensional) statistical
model, the techniques leveraged must involve data-adaptive estimation, while
still providing trustworthy statistical inference, necessarily using estimators
grounded in semiparametric efficiency theory. That is, given the parameter of
interest and the nature of the statistical model, we maintain that the choice
guiding the algorithm should not be \textit{ad hoc}, but rather based on the
relative efficiency of competing estimators. We have proposed methods that draw
on existing work in statistical genomics and merge these with modern proposals
for the analysis of variable importance, ultimately yielding a procedure that
data-adaptively identifies promising biomarkers from a large set and that can be
applied to data generated from experiments belonging to a large class of study
designs.

We illustrated the method using an example miRNA data set (featuring benzene
exposure) by applying, on a biomarker-by-biomarker basis, the outlined approach,
combining TMLE with the moderated t-statistic to estimate the association of
each potential biomarker with exposure. Thus, we present a flexible
generalization of moderated statistics to the case of asymptotically linear
parameters, obtaining robust small-sample inference, derived from influence
curve-based estimation of the parameter of interest. The results suggest that
instabilities inherent in small-sample inference can be ameliorated by combining
this asymptotically efficient estimator of the ATE (based on TMLE) with the
moderated t-statistic (implemented in the ``limma'' software package); in our
example, this results in the isolation of fewer statistically significant
biomarkers. Since application of the moderated statistics has no impact on
asymptotic properties of TMLE-based estimation procedures --- the adjustment for
within-probe inference becomes negligible as sample size grows --- we can
readily use the asymptotic theory underlying TMLE.

This combination of existing methods offers many advantages: (1) it estimates
target parameters relevant to specific scientific questions, in the presence of
many confounders, without placing assumptions on the underlying statistical
model; (2) it uses the theoretical optimality of loss-based estimation via the
Super Learner algorithm, which optimally balances the bias-variance tradeoff in
finite samples by appropriately choosing a level of parsimony to match the
information available in the sample; (3) its reliance on TMLE-based estimators
reduces residual bias and adds an appropriate degree of smoothing, making
influence curve-based based inference available for the target parameters of
interest; and (4) it robustifies inference by leveraging  moderated statistics
to derive joint inference with fewer false positives than would result from
otherwise poor estimation of the sampling variability of the estimator. The
result is a theoretically sound, data-adaptive estimation procedure, based on
pre-specified, flexible learning algorithms, that guarantees robust statistical
inference. While the continuing development of new biotechnologies promises new
insights into the myriad relationships between biomarkers and health,
procedures like the one presented here will surely be necessary to ameliorate
the pitfalls of increasing dimensionality of the scientific problems of
interest, by providing a rigorous and generalizable statistical framework for
accurate, robust, and conservative biomarker discovery.
