\chapter{Software Package}

To support widespread use of this newly developed methodology, an R package,
``biotmle,'' which provides a generalized implementation of this biomarker
discovery procedure, has been made publicly available. As previously described
in Section~\ref{estimation}, the method, based on targeted minimum loss-based
estimation~\cite{van2011targeted} and a generalization of the moderated
statistics of Smyth~\cite{smyth2004linear}, is designed for use with both
microarray and next-generation biological sequencing data. The statistical
approach made available in this software package relies on the use of TMLE to
rigorously evaluate the association between a set of potential biomarkers and
another variable of interest while adjusting for potential confounding from
another set of user-specified covariates. The implementation is in the form of a
package for the R language for statistical computing \cite{R}.

There are two principal ways in which the biomarker discovery techniques in
the ``biotmle'' R package may be used: to evaluate the association between (1) a
phenotypic measure (say, environmental exposure) and a biomarker of interest,
and (2) an outcome of interest (e.g., survival status at a given time) and a
biomarker measurement, both while controlling for background covariates (e.g.,
BMI, age). By using a TMLE-based procedure to estimate the average treatment
effect in a targeted manner, the package produces easily interpretable results
in the form of a variable importance measure (see~\cite{van2011targeted} for an
extended discussion), making the ``biotmle'' package aptly suited for
applications in bioinformatics, genomics, and molecular epidemiology.

While the principal results produced by this R package matches those produced by
the immensely popular ``limma'' R package~\cite{smyth2005limma}, ``biotmle''
provides several unique utilities, largely in the form of several expressive
plotting methods --- for example, a heatmap based on the recently developed
``superheat'' R package~\cite{barter2017superheat} --- and a custom ``biotmle''
class, based on the popular ``SummarizedExperiment''
class~\cite{huber2015orchestrating}. While the R package is currently publicly
available at \url{https://github.com/nhejazi/biotmle}, submission of the
software package to the centralized repository maintained by the Bioconductor
project~\cite{gentleman2004bioconductor} is underway.
